VOLUNTEER CONDUCT STANDARDS

All volunteers of Kids In Crisis are expected to maintain the highest level of professional conduct in their dealings with children under the care or supervision of Kids in Crisis, as well as their families.

The term children when used in this policy is defined as any child or youth who is or was a client under the care of Kids in Crisis, or who participates or participated in any Kids In Crisis program, including our school- and community-based programs such as SafeTalk and Lighthouse. These standards apply equally to children at our SafeHaven Shelter and to children you meet through those programs.

Professional expectations of volunteers include, but are not limited to:

1. Serving as a positive role model for each individual child under the care of KIC
2. Taking necessary steps to ensure a safe and nurturing environment for children and youth in placement.
3. Maintaining volunteer/child relationships that are clearly distinguishable by lines of professional conduct and propriety.
4. Promoting positive, rehabilitative relationships with children entrusted to their care.
5. The cultivation or maintenance of social relationships with children, immediate or extended family members outside the boundaries of a professional treatment context are prohibited.

In order to maintain the necessary safeguards for both volunteer members and children, and to minimize the likelihood of children forming strong dependency relationships and/or unrealistic expectations towards volunteer members, the following boundaries and restrictions have been established.

1. The establishment of a personal relationship with a child which transcends the boundaries of the volunteer member's professional responsibilities is prohibited.
2. Children under the care or previously under the care of Kids In Crisis programs may not visit volunteer members homes.
3. Volunteer members shall not maintain or encourage relationships with children formerly under the care of Kids In Crisis Program.
4. Visits/placements of children in the homes of Kids in Crisis volunteer members is prohibited.
5. Volunteer members may not provide home telephone numbers or addresses to children under the care or formerly under the care of Kids In Crisis Program.
6. Sexual conduct of any type is prohibited, including physical conduct of a sexual nature between volunteer and child, or any activity of a volunteer member to provoke or encourage a child to engage in an act of sexual intimacy.
7. Volunteer members shall not commit any act, or provoke another to act in such a way that causes, or may cause, physical or emotional injury to children including the use of excessive force.
8. Volunteer members shall not use language or other forms of communication to degrade or threaten a child.
9. Volunteer members shall comply with all standards of care or treatment required by law, rules, policies, guidelines, procedures or written directives.
10. Volunteers may not give token gifts or special treats to children unless prior approval has been given by the child's Social Worker.
11. Volunteers may not accept personal gifts from children or their parents.

Due to the complexity of this subject matter, volunteers are encouraged to discuss issues of concern with appropriate managerial and supervisory personnel.
